0.9.0 Release notes (#48)
percona/pcsm-docs: docs/release-notes/0.9.0.md

    ### SBOMs for PCSM

    Percona ClusterSync for MongoDB (PCSM) now provides Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) for every release. SBOMs improve software supply chain transparency by documenting the components and dependencies included in a build. They are generated automatically as part of the release pipeline in the industry standard `CycloneDX 1.6` format.

    SBOMs are distributed through the following channels:

    === ":fontawesome-brands-github: GitHub"
        The latest SBOM will be placed in the root of the [percona/percona-clustersync-mongodb](https://github.com/percona/percona-clustersync-mongodb) main branch.

    === "📦 Binaries/Tarballs" 
        An SBOM file will be included in the root directory of the release archive.

    === "📜 Packages" 
        For `.deb` and `.rpm` packages, the SBOM file is installed in a standard documentation directory such as `/usr/share/doc/`.

    === "🐳 Docker" 
        The SBOM will be attached directly to the Docker image as metadata.

    === "🏛️ Percona Trust Center"
        We will investigate automating the upload of SBOMs to the Trust Center to maintain a centralized, up-to-date repository.

> === "🔄 Cross-version replication"

Reviewer: I would firtst mention this as a highlight and than SBOM

Author: Sure @inelpandzic

    

## Changelog

### New features

* [PCSM-282](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-282): Added Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) for PCSM releases. SBOMs are generated in the `CycloneDX 1.6` format and distributed with release artifacts.

* [PCSM-286](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-286): Added support for cross-version replication from MongoDB 7.0 to MongoDB 8.0.

* [PCSM-289](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-289): Added support for cross-version replication from MongoDB 6.0 to MongoDB 8.0.

### Improvements

* [PCSM-176](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-176): Added detailed finalization status reporting through the `/status` endpoint. You can now monitor the state of the PCSM finalize operation in real time using the `/status` endpoint. While finalization is underway, the `/status` reports that finalization is running. On completion, it returns a structured summary of the finalization results, including details about any **unsuccessful index builds**. This allows you to identify and diagnose index-related issues without the need to manually inspect logs.

> ### Bugs

Reviewer: We are missing: https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-323

Please check is there something else that we need to add.

Author: Ok.

    === "📦 Binaries/Tarballs" 
        An SBOM file will be included in the root directory of the release archive.

    === "📜 Packages" 
        For `.deb` and `.rpm` packages, the SBOM file is installed in a standard documentation directory such as `/usr/share/doc/`.

    === "🐳 Docker" 
        The SBOM will be attached directly to the Docker image as metadata.

    === "🏛️ Percona Trust Center"
         We will investigate automating the upload of SBOMs to the Trust Center to maintain a centralized, up-to-date repository.

=== "🔄 Cross-version replication"
    ### Replication from 6.0 ➡️ 8.0 and 7.0 ➡️ 8.0

    PCSM now supports cross-version replication from MongoDB 6.0 and MongoDB 7.0 source clusters to MongoDB 8.0 target clusters. This enables staged upgrade and migration workflows while maintaining continuous replication between supported MongoDB versions.

    At startup, PCSM validates the source and target MongoDB versions against the supported compatibility matrix. If the source cluster is running a higher major version than the target cluster, PCSM prevents replication from starting and exits with an error.

>     For more information, see our [documentation]().

Author: Will add the link later.

| 8.0.x | 7.0.x | **No** | Downgrade replication is not supported. |
| 7.0.x | 6.0.x | **No** | Downgrade replication is not supported. |

For more information, see the [documentation](https://docs.percona.com/percona-clustersync-for-mongodb/version-compatibility.html).

### Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)

Percona ClusterSync for MongoDB (PCSM) now provides Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) for every release. SBOMs improve software supply chain transparency by documenting the components and dependencies included in a build. They are generated automatically as part of the release pipeline in the industry standard `CycloneDX 1.6` format.

SBOMs are distributed through the following channels:

- **GitHub:** The latest SBOM is placed in the root of the [percona/percona-clustersync-mongodb](https://github.com/percona/percona-clustersync-mongodb) main branch.

- **Binaries/Tarballs:** An SBOM file is included in the root directory of the release archive.

- **Packages:** For `.deb` and `.rpm` packages, the SBOM file is installed in a standard documentation directory such as `/usr/share/doc/`.

- **Docker:** The SBOM is attached directly to the Docker image as metadata.

> - **Percona Trust Center:** We will investigate automating the upload of SBOMs to the Trust Center to maintain a centralized, up-to-date repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Changelog

### New features

* [PCSM-282](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-282): Added Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) for PCSM releases. SBOMs are generated in the `CycloneDX 1.6` format and distributed with release artifacts.

* [PCSM-286](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-286): Added support for cross-version replication from MongoDB 7.0 to MongoDB 8.0.

* [PCSM-289](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-289): Added support for cross-version replication from MongoDB 6.0 to MongoDB 8.0.

### Improvements

> * [PCSM-176](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-176): Added detailed finalization status reporting through the `/status` endpoint. You can now monitor the state of the PCSM finalize operation in real time using the `/status` endpoint. While finalization is underway, the `/status` reports that finalization is running. On completion, it returns a structured summary of the finalization results, including details about any **unsuccessful index builds**. This allows you to identify and diagnose index-related issues without the need to manually inspect logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [PCSM-176](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-176): Introduced a finalization section to the /status endpoint to report failed, incomplete, or inconsistent indexes, eliminating the need to parse logs. This update also fixes inconsistent index detection in sharded clusters, ensuring accurate reporting across all data shards.
```

### Bugs

* [PCSM-314](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-314): Fixed an issue where PCSM could crash during replication when processing an event against an item that did not exist in the target array, causing the replication to halt unexpectedly.

> * [PCSM-323](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-323): Clone operations previously relied on automatically determined segment sizes. The `--clone-segment-size` option is now available, allowing you to specify a preferred segment size (for example, 500MB or 1GiB) when necessary, thereby improving flexibility and control over clone operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [PCSM-323](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-323): Fixed an auto-segmentation issue where byte sizes were incorrectly passed as document counts, restoring parallelized read operations for large collection clones. This update also introduces a --clone-segment-size flag for explicit configuration and adds detailed logging for segmentation metrics.
```

We're excited to announce Percona ClusterSync for MongoDB (PCSM) 0.9.0. This release introduces **cross-version replication** support, allowing replication from MongoDB 6.0 and 7.0 source clusters to MongoDB 8.0 targets. This capability helps simplify staged upgrades and migration workflows while maintaining continuous replication between supported MongoDB versions.

We also ship a **Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)** with every release, providing visibility into the components and dependencies included in each release.

[Get started with {{pcsm.short}}](../installation.md){.md-button}

## Release highlights

### Cross-version support

PCSM now supports cross-version replication from MongoDB 6.0 and MongoDB 7.0 source clusters to MongoDB 8.0 target clusters. This enables staged upgrade and migration workflows while maintaining continuous replication between supported MongoDB versions.

At startup, PCSM validates the source and target MongoDB versions against the supported compatibility matrix. If the source cluster is running a **higher major version** than the target cluster, PCSM **prevents replication** from starting and exits with an error.

**Compatibility matrix**

> | **Source version** | **Target version** | **Supported**| **Notes** |

Reviewer 3: Let's keep this matrix only in a dedicated page in the compatibility matrix - otherwise we'd have another place to update in case.

Author: Ok.

|----------------|----------------|-----------|-------|

> | 6.0.x | 6.0.x | **Yes** | — |

Reviewer 3: Also note here - thge min version is 6.0.17 - so not the entire 6.0.x

* [PCSM-289](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-289): Added support for cross-version replication from MongoDB 6.0 to MongoDB 8.0.

### Improvements

* [PCSM-176](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-176): Introduced a finalization section to the /status endpoint to report failed, incomplete, or inconsistent indexes, eliminating the need to parse logs. This update also fixes inconsistent index detection in sharded clusters, ensuring accurate reporting across all data shards.

### Bugs

* [PCSM-314](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-314): Fixed an issue where PCSM could crash during replication when processing an event against an item that did not exist in the target array, causing the replication to halt unexpectedly.

* [PCSM-323](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PCSM-323): Fixed an auto-segmentation issue where byte sizes were incorrectly passed as document counts, restoring parallelized read operations for large collection clones. This update also introduces a `--clone-segment-size` flag for explicit configuration and adds detailed logging for segmentation metrics.

    !!! note

>         This fix improves replication performance for large collections. In benchmark tests, PCSM was 37.3% faster (approximately 1.4×) after the fix.

Reviewer 3: That should not be presented here in a "changelog" - but moved to highlight - let's be happy we improved performance.

Author: Sure.
